Hi and welcome back, so in this video we're
going to create a 3D sphere of the right size,
apply a temporary texture so that we can see
it rolling; add a sphere collider; add a rigidbody,
3D this time and set properties, and make
the boll roll down the lane. So I'll start
you off on the first bit and then I'll challenge
you to write a little script at the end to
get the rest working. So, first thing we need
to do is make ourselves a ball and then focus
on it. So, GameObject / 3D object / sphere
this time. So where is that and how big is
it? Well it has put itself just in front of
the camera so we can see it and it has made
itself 1 by 1 by 1 centimetre.
A bit too small right? The size of a sugar
cube. So if we look here at the Ball specification
we can see that it should be 21.59cm or between
21.59 and 21.83 there's some flex in the rules
let's call it 21.7 OK. So firstly let's just
check that that's right, 21.7 so at first
glance it doesn't kind of look right - if
we make the x scale 21.7 is it filling the
width of the lane? Well it appears not to
be, but if you click into isometric view and
check then you're going to be sure that the
reason that it's not the right size is not
a perspective issue, so if we go 21.7 in all
dimensions; cm that is, how are we looking
in this ball?
On this sphere? Well that is actually feasible
that it is 21.7, it's about a fifth of the
lane and if you go to 105 which is the width
of the lane then look, you'll see that it
completely fills the lane. Now, again, you
have under this gizmo here an isometric and
a perspective toggle. In perspective and up
close it looks like that ball is wider than
the lane but actually if you were to scroll
down and zoom out you'd see that it was the
same size. Or you click isometric and you
can also see that it's the same size, but
isometric is really weird, right? Because
even those bowling pins at the end look the
same size.
Very handy for size comparison if you use
isometric - for visual reality use perspective,
hopefully that makes sense. So I just need
to choose the right mouse button as I drag
around, I'm using my left hand as I give my
right arm a bit of a break. So, what's the
deal? The deal is that this ball needs to
have 21.7 in all 3 dimensions; it needs to
be sitting off the deck by maybe 20 cm? Is
that how high it leaves your hand? Just a
little bit off the deck? I think so and it
needs to be at a z position of, I think it
leaves your hand what, 30cm ahead of the foul
line?
Double click the sphere to focus on it if
you've lost it in the scene, great. Now you
can angle the camera down a little bit and
then go to your main camera, and again, game
object / align with view. So if you look at
the game now, have you got a view down the
lane? Well we haven't, so what's going on?
You've clicked on main camera here, it's facing
down the lane, and I've clicked main camera,
clicked game object and said align with view,
and it's not working, so what's wrong? Well
try changing the field of view of your camera,
that was the problem. The field of view was
so narrow that it was never going to work.
Now in the game tab we've kind of got the
scene that we want. It needs modification,
it needs improvement, but we are on the way.
The basic problem we actually have with the
camera right now is that it is too high, so
as you move the camera down by just moving
the y position of the camera you get a much
more sensible perspective; and now over in
the game view you see; fantastic, so we have
the ball, the other thing I said that we would
do is to texture that ball. So, I have provided
you in the start pack under images an unwrapped
football texture.
If we actually look at that texture, there
it is. I has been unwrapped off a 3D model
and put into a flat image like that. So that's
the sort of thing you're looking for when
you go and look for a texture on google images.
Of course in our Blender course that you're
starting to hear about we will be showing
you exactly how to make things in 3D and then
export the textures; but for now for simplicity
the simple way to get this football texture,
or whatever texture you choose and I do encourage
you to either make or find your own texture
just drag it on to the sphere.
And Unity is smart enough to say well he must
mean - or she must mean that they want to
apply that image as a texture to the material
of the sphere. Now all these terms, material,
texture or whatever now I could go and formally
define them for you or we could just do stuff
and learn it by absorption, and that's my
preference. When you're looking at this sphere
you have two meshes. You have the blue mesh,
which is its actual render mesh which you
can turn on and off, and now of course includes
its texture, and you have its collider mesh
which is for the physics.
Great, so what happens if you click play now?
The ball just sits there floating in mid-air,
you see that if we go into the scene view?
Why is it floating in mid-air? Why is it not
falling? Well it's not falling because it
doesn't have any physics component on it.
The way that we add physics is that we add
a rigidbody but not a 2D rigidbody any more,
it must be this top one. So add component
/ rigidbody and now we have a 3D rigid body.
One of the first questions is what's its mass?
Well go over to your GDD and put in 7.3kg
from the top.
Let's leave everything else default for no,
let's just check that the ball now falls under
gravity and hits the lane - perfect; and you're
set up, you're ready for your challenge, and
your challenge is going to be that you're
going to make your ball go flying down the
lane, so. Get the ball hitting the pins. Give
an appropriate initial velocity from script,
I suggest you call the script ball.cs, point
so that it passes through the pins, so fire
it down the lane so that it passes through
the pins. It won't hit the pins yet, that's
going to be a couple of lectures ahead in
terms of its proper interaction with the pins,
and play a rolling sound.
We've provided you with a rolling sound, or
go and make your own, or get your microphone
out and go *brrrrrrrb*or some equally perfect
rolling sound.
was to get this ball rolling down the lane
so let's do it. I'm going to rename my sphere
to a ball, add a new component which is a
script and I'm going to call it ball and then
I'm going to go into it. Let it load. OK.
Now, slightly different in Unity 5, we actually
need to explicitly go and get the rigidbody
component to access it, we can't just go .rigidbody.
So we have a private rigidbody, not 2D but
rigidbody and just call it rigidbody.
Fantastic, on start we just need to go and
find that rigidbody component. So, rigidbody
= and we are going to be doing a lot of this
gameobject dot find. Sorry, not game object
dot find. Now why isn't it game object dot
find? Let's think about this, just a really
quick recap for you. Why are we not using
gameobject dot find? Why are we going to use
getcomponent? Take a look at what we are doing,
we're on a ball, we're in the ball's script
component here, that's our context, what we're
looking for is another component of the same
game object, i.e. the rigidbody. So it's a
getcomponent that we are doing.
That's the most direct way to get there. GetComponent
Of Type - rigidbody not 2D, and then it's
a method. So now we have the rigid body, we
can go rigidbody.velocity equals now we have
to construct a new vector3, 0, we don't need
the f, 0 again because we're sending it in
the z direction, and then let's give it a
bit of speed in the z but what's the speed?
Well let's make it variable, that's what I'm
going to do, I'm going to make it variable
there and then I'm going to make a public
float, because you can't count it on your
hands, launchSpeed, that'll go in the inspector.
OK? Let's try it, launch speed should stop
being red once I compile this code.
OK I'm missing an n in my spelling of the
launch speed. Fantastic, it's gone the right
colour, now let's try. Go to the ball, set
a launch speed before you go, let's go 200,
and click play. Cool, there it goes, down
the lane, and when it hits the lane it starts
rolling. You can't really see what's going
on at the other end, which is why we're not
going to deal with the physics yet, we'll
deal with the physics once we've got our camera
working but we could see over in scene view
if we focus over on the pins that the ball
hits the pins and then does some really weird
stuff. We'll sort the really weird stuff out
later, but that part of the challenge is done.
Now the other part of the challenge was to
make a sound, right. Now in the start pack
we've given you a ball rolling sound. Your
most direct way of adding this to the ball
was to drag it to the ball. Look what good
old Unity does for us, it number one adds
an audio source, it number two attaches the
ball rolling clip to it. All we need to do
is not play on awake because we're going to
want later control over the play time in script,
then go back to your ball script. You're going
to have to do a very similar thing here, right?
We're going to need private access to an audio
source and it's going to be called audioSource
for now.
You could call it ball sound if you wanted
to. Why don't we do that? Just for fun. Either
call it exactly what it is, or maybe something
specific but ball sound is just fine here.
Now we need to find it. Ball sound equals
GetComponent audioSource. You see the problem
with using ballSound is that it doesn't read
quite as well, because it doesn't tell us
anything about the type of this and immediately
we're having to find the type so I am going
to stick with audioSource, with a small a
of course because it's an instance. Alright?
Because then this line, audioSource = getComponent
AudioSource looks almost exactly like that
line there which is rigidbody equals GetComponent
rigidbody, so we could group those together
we find the things that we're looking for
and then here immediately on start we could
go audiosource.play.
Oops not Broadcast message but play and it's
a method. OK, and then of course those two
things together are launching the ball so
let's use the refactor tool. Highlight it
all, right click, refactor, extract method.
Go down with the cursor, and then you can
go launch. So Ball dot launch that sounds
fine, and do we want something from the outside
to be able to launch the ball? Why not. Public,
why not make it public? So now it's quite
clear what we're doing. On the start we're
finding the components we need, and this business
about needing to find the rigid body is new
to you with Unity 5 because of its API changes
which we told you about at the beginning of
the course when we told you about the differences,
and also we've got a blog post if you go to
the completeunitydeveloper.com there's a blog
post on the differences between Unity 5 and
Unity 4.
Then we set the velocity and then we play
that audio source. So let's try it. I can
hear that, and then it hits the ground and
it starts rolling, and it eventually gets
to the pins. OK the sound runs out too early,
but we'll tweak all that later. You have achieved
what you needed to achieve for this video,
so congratulations and see you soon.